README.md, before:

<!--
parent:
  order: false
-->

<div align="center">
  <h1> Evmos </h1>
</div>

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/releases/latest">
    <img alt="Version" src="https://img.shields.io/github/tag/tharsis/evmos.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/blob/main/LICENSE">
    <img alt="License: Apache-2.0" src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/tharsis/evmos.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/evmos/evmos">
    <img alt="GoDoc" src="https://godoc.org/github.com/evmos/evmos?status.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/evmos/evmos">
    <img alt="Go report card" src="https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/evmos/evmos"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/5018">
    <img alt="Lines of code" src="https://img.shields.io/tokei/lines/github/tharsis/evmos">
  </a>
</div>
<div align="center">
  <a href="https://discord.gg/evmos">
    <img alt="Discord" src="https://img.shields.io/discord/809048090249134080.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/actions?query=branch%3Amain+workflow%3ALint">
    <img alt="Lint Status" src="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/actions/workflows/lint.yml/badge.svg?branch=main" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://codecov.io/gh/tharsis/evmos">
    <img alt="Code Coverage" src="https://codecov.io/gh/tharsis/evmos/branch/main/graph/badge.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://twitter.com/EvmosOrg">
    <img alt="Twitter Follow Evmos" src="https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/EvmosOrg"/>
  </a>
</div>

Evmos is a scalable, high-throughput Proof-of-Stake blockchain
that is fully compatible and interoperable with Ethereum.
It's built using the [Cosmos SDK](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/)
which runs on top of the [Tendermint Core](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint) consensus engine.

**Note**: Requires [Go 1.19+](https://golang.org/dl/)

## Installation

For prerequisites and detailed build instructions
please read the [Installation](https://docs.evmos.org/validators/quickstart/installation.html) instructions.
Once the dependencies are installed, run:

```bash
make install
```

Or check out the latest [release](https://github.com/evmos/evmos/releases).

## Quick Start

To learn how the Evmos works from a high-level perspective,
go to the [Introduction](https://docs.evmos.org/about/intro/overview.html) section from the documentation.
You can also check the instructions to [Run a Node](https://docs.evmos.org/validators/quickstart/run_node.html).

## Community

The following chat channels and forums are a great spot to ask questions about Evmos:

- [Evmos Twitter](https://twitter.com/EvmosOrg)
- [Evmos Discord](https://discord.gg/evmos)
- [Evmos Forum](https://commonwealth.im/evmos)
- [Tharsis Twitter](https://twitter.com/TharsisHQ)

## Contributing

Looking for a good place to start contributing?
Check out some
[`good first issues`](https://github.com/evmos/evmos/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22).

For additional instructions, standards and style guides, please refer to the [Contributing](./CONTRIBUTING.md) document.

## Careers

See our open positions on [Greenhouse](https://boards.eu.greenhouse.io/evmos).

Commit message:

removed docs folder and updated readme (#1424)
* removed docs folder and updated readme

* Apply suggestions from code review

Co-authored-by: Daniel Burckhardt <daniel.m.burckhardt@gmail.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: Federico Kunze Küllmer <31522760+fedekunze@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Daniel Burckhardt <daniel.m.burckhardt@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

<!--
parent:
  order: false
-->

<div align="center">
  <h1> Evmos </h1>
</div>

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/releases/latest">
    <img alt="Version" src="https://img.shields.io/github/tag/tharsis/evmos.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/blob/main/LICENSE">
    <img alt="License: Apache-2.0" src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/tharsis/evmos.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/evmos/evmos">
    <img alt="GoDoc" src="https://godoc.org/github.com/evmos/evmos?status.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/evmos/evmos">
    <img alt="Go report card" src="https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/evmos/evmos"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/5018">
    <img alt="Lines of code" src="https://img.shields.io/tokei/lines/github/tharsis/evmos">
  </a>
</div>
<div align="center">
  <a href="https://discord.gg/evmos">
    <img alt="Discord" src="https://img.shields.io/discord/809048090249134080.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/actions?query=branch%3Amain+workflow%3ALint">
    <img alt="Lint Status" src="https://github.com/evmos/evmos/actions/workflows/lint.yml/badge.svg?branch=main" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://codecov.io/gh/tharsis/evmos">
    <img alt="Code Coverage" src="https://codecov.io/gh/tharsis/evmos/branch/main/graph/badge.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://twitter.com/EvmosOrg">
    <img alt="Twitter Follow Evmos" src="https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/EvmosOrg"/>
  </a>
</div>

Evmos is a scalable, high-throughput Proof-of-Stake blockchain
that is fully compatible and interoperable with Ethereum.
It's built using the [Cosmos SDK](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/)
which runs on top of the [Tendermint Core](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint) consensus engine.

## Documentation

Our documentation is hosted in a [separate repository](https://github.com/evmos/docs) and can be found at [docs.evmos.org](https://docs.evmos.org).
Head over there and check it out.

**Note**: Requires [Go 1.19+](https://golang.org/dl/)

## Installation

For prerequisites and detailed build instructions
please read the [Installation](https://docs.evmos.org/validators/quickstart/installation.html) instructions.
Once the dependencies are installed, run:

```bash
make install
```

Or check out the latest [release](https://github.com/evmos/evmos/releases).

## Quick Start

To learn how the Evmos works from a high-level perspective,
go to the [Introduction](https://docs.evmos.org/about/intro/overview.html) section from the documentation.
You can also check the instructions to [Run a Node](https://docs.evmos.org/validators/quickstart/run_node.html).

## Community

The following chat channels and forums are a great spot to ask questions about Evmos:

- [Evmos Twitter](https://twitter.com/EvmosOrg)
- [Evmos Discord](https://discord.gg/evmos)
- [Evmos Forum](https://commonwealth.im/evmos)
- [Evmos Twitter](https://twitter.com/EvmosOrg)

## Contributing

Looking for a good place to start contributing?
Check out some
[`good first issues`](https://github.com/evmos/evmos/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22).

For additional instructions, standards and style guides, please refer to the [Contributing](./CONTRIBUTING.md) document.

## Careers

See our open positions on [Greenhouse](https://boards.eu.greenhouse.io/evmos).
